OBAMA: Hello everybody.  We really got a full house today, huh?

OBAMA: Well, all I want for Christmas is to take your questions.  But first let
me say a little bit about this year.  In last year's final press conference, I
said 2014 would be a year of action, and would be a breakthrough year for
America.  And it has been.  Yes there were crises that we had to tackle around
the world.  Many that were unanticipated. We have more work to do to make sure
our economy, our justice system, and our government work not just for the few
but for the many.  But there is no doubt that we can enter into the New Year
with renewed confidence that America is making significant strides where it
counts.

OBAMA: The steps that we took early on to rescue our economy and rebuild it on a
new foundation help make 2014 the strongest year for job growth since the 1990s.
All told, over a 57 month streak our businesses have created nearly 11million
new jobs.  Almost all the job growth we've seen has been in full time
positions.  Much of the recent pickup in job growth has been in higher paying
industries.  And in a hopeful sign for middle class families, wages are on the
rise again.

OBAMA: Our investments in American manufacturing have helped fuel its best
stretch of job growth, also since the 1990's.  America's now the number 1
producer of oil, the number 1 producer of natural gas, we're saving drivers
about 70 cents a gallon at the pump over last Christmas.  And effectively,
today, our rescue of the auto industry is officially over.  We've now repaid
tax payers every dime, and more of what my administration committed, and the
American auto industry is on track for its strongest year since 2005.  And we
created about a half a million new jobs in the auto industry alone.

OBAMA: Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, about 10 million American's have
gained health insurance just this past year.  Enrollment is beginning to pick up
again during the open-enrollment period.  The uninsured rate is at a near record
low.  Since the law passed, the price of healthcare has risen at its slowest
rate in about 50 years.  And we cut our deficits by about 2/3 since I took
office; bringing them to below their forty year average.

OBAMA: Meanwhile around the world, America is leading.  We're leading the
coalition to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL, a coalition that includes Arab
partners.  We're leading the international community to check Russian aggression
in Ukraine.  We are leading the global fight to combat ebola in West Africa.
And we are preventing an outbreak from taking place here at home.  We're leading
efforts to address climate change, including last month's joint announcement
with China that's already jumpstarting new progress in other countries. We're
writing a new chapter in our leadership here in the Americas by turning a new
page in our relationship with the Cuban peoples.

OBAMA: And, in less than two weeks, after more than 13 years, our combat mission
in Afghanistan will be over.  Today, more of our troops are home for the
holidays than any time in over a decade.  Still, many of our men and women in
uniform will spend Christmas in harm's way, and they should know that the
country is united in support of you and grateful not only to you but also to
your families.

OBAMA: The 6 years since the crisis have demanded hard work and sacrifice on
everybody's part.  But as a country, we have every right to be proud of what
we've accomplished.  More jobs, more people insured, a growing economy,
shrinking deficits, a bustling industry, booming energy.  Pick any metric that
you want and America's resurgence is real.  We are better off.  I've always said
that recovering from the crisis of 2008 was our first order of business.  And on
that business America has outperformed all of our other competitors.  Over the
past 4 years we've put more people back to work than all other advanced
economies combined.  We've now come to a point where we have the chance to
reverse an even deeper problem; the decades-long erosion of middle-class jobs
and incomes.  And to make sure that the middle-class is the engine that powers
our prosperity for decades to come.  But to do that we're going to have to make
some smart choices.  We're going to have to make the right choices.  We're going
to have to invest in the things that secure even faster growth in higher paying
jobs for more Americans.  And I'm being absolutely sincere when I say I want to
work with this new Congress to get things done.  To make those investments.  To
make sure the government's working smarter, and better.  We're gonna disagree on
some things, but there are gonna be areas of agreement.  And we gotta be able to
make that happen, and that's going to involve compromise every once in a while.
And we saw during this lame-duck period that, perhaps, that spirit of compromise
may be coming to the fore.

OBAMA: In terms of my own job, I'm energized. I'm excited about the prospects
for the next couple of years.  And I'm certainly not going to be stopping for a
minute in the effort to make life better for ordinary Americans.  Because thanks
to their efforts, we really do have a new foundation that's been laid.  We are
better positioned than we have been in a very long time.  The future's ready to
be written.  We've set the stage for this American moment.  And I'm going to
spend every minute of my last two years making sure that we seize it.

OBAMA: My presidency is entering the 4th quarter; interesting stuff happen in
the 4th quarter.  And I'm looking forward to it.  But going into the 4th quarter
you usually get a timeout; I'm now looking forward to a quiet timeout- Christmas
with my family.  So I want to wish everybody a Merry Christmas, a happy
Channukah, a happy New Year.  I hope that all of you get some time to spend with
your family's as well because one thing that we share is that we're away too
much from them.

OBAMA: And now, Josh has given me the who's-been-naughty-and-who's-been-nice-list and
I'm gonna use it to take some questions.  And we're gonna start with Carrie
Brown of Politico.

Reporter: Thank you Mr. President.  I'll start with North Korea since that seems
to be the biggest topic today.  What does a proportional response look like to
the Sony hack.  Did Sony make the right decision in pulling the movie, or does
that set a dangerous precedent when faced with this kind of situation.

OBAMA: Let me address the second question first.  Sony's a corporation.  It suffered
significant damage.  There were threats against its employees.  I am sympathetic
to the concerns that they faced.  Having said all that, yes I think they made a
mistake.  In this interconnected digital world there are gonna be
opportunities for hackers to engage in cyberassaults both in the private sector
and the public sector.  Our first order of business is making sure that we do
everything possible to harden sites and prevent those kinds of attacks from
taking place.  When I came into office I set up a cyber security inter-agency
team to look at everything that we could do at the government level to prevent
these kinds of attacks.  We've been coordinating with the private sector.  But a
lot more needs to be done.  We're not even close to where we need to be.  And
one of the things in the New Year that I hope Congress will prepare, is prepared
to work with us on is strong cyber security laws that allow for information
sharing across private sector platforms as well as the public sector so that we
are incorporating best practices and preventing these attacks from happening in
the first place.  But even as we get better the hackers are gonna get better
too.  Some of them are gonna be state actors, some of them are gonna be
non-state actors.  All of them are gonna be sophisticated, annd many of them can
do some damage.  We can not have a society in which some dictator someplace can
start imposing censorship here in the United States.  Because if somebody is
able to intimidate folks out of releasing a satirical movie, imagine what they
start doing when they see a documentary that they don't like.  Or news reports
that they don't like.  Or even worse, imagine if producers and distributors
and others start engaging in self-censorship because they don't want to offend
the sensibilities of somebody whose sensibilities probably need to be offended.
So that's not who we are.  That's not what America's about.  Again I am
sympathetic that Sony is a private company and was worried about liabilities and
this and that and the other.  I wish they'd spoken to me first.  I would've told
them: "do not get into a pattern in which you're intimidated by these kinds of
criminal attacks".

OBAMA: Imagine if instead of it being a cyber threat, somebody had
broken into their offices and destroyed a bunch of computers, and stolen disks.
Is that what it takes for suddenly you to pull the plug on something?  Um, so
we'll engage with not just the fim industry, but the news industry, the private
sector around these issues.  We already have; we will continue to do so.  But I
think all of us have to anticipate that occasionally there are gonna be breaches
like this.  They're gonna be costly.  They're gonna be serious.  We take them
with the upmost seriousness.  But we can't start changing our patterns of
behavior any more than we stop going to a foootball game because there might be
the possibility of a terrorist attack.  Any more than Boston didn't run its
marathon this year because of the possibility of somebody might try to cause
harm.  So let's not get into that way of doing business.

Reporter: Would you consider- will you take any symbolic steps, like, watching
the movie yourself?  Or doing some sort of screening here that-

OBAMA: I've got a long list of movies that I'm gonna be watching.  I never release my
full movie list. But, let's talk about the specifics of what we now know.  The
FBI announced today and we can confirm that North Korea engaged in this attack.
I think it says something interesting about North Korea that they decided to
have the state mount an all-out assault on a movie studio because of a satirical
movie starring Seth Rogen.  And James Flaco [sic].  I love Seth.  And I love
James, but the notion that that was a threat to them, I think gives you some
sense of the kindof regime we're talking about here.

OBAMA: They caused a lot of damage.  And we will respond.  We will respond proportionally, and we will
respond in a place and time and manner that we choose.  It's not something that
I will annoice here today at a press conference.  More broadly though this
points to the need for us to work with the international comunity to start
setting up some very clear rules of the road in terms of how the internet and
cyber operates.  Right now it's sort of the wild west  And part of the problem is
you've got weak states that can engage in these kinds of attacks.  You've got
non state actors that can do enormous damage.  That's part of what makes this
issue of cybersecurity so urgent.  Again this is part of the reason that it's
going to be so important for Congress to work with us and get an actual bill
passed that allows for the kind of information sharing that we need.  Because
you know, if we don't put in place the kindof architecture that can prevent
these kinds of attacks from taking place this is not just gonna be affecting
movies.  This is gonna be affecting our entire enconomy in ways that are
extraordinarily significant.  And by the way, I hear you're moving to Europe.
Where are you gonna be?

Reporter: Brussels.

OBAMA: Brussels?

Reporter: Helping Politico start a new publication.

OBAMA: Well congratulations.  Well I think there's no doubt that what Belgium needs is
a version of Politico. [laughs]  The waffles are delicious there by the way.
Cheryl Bowman?  You've been naughty.  Cheryl, go ahead.

Reporter: Thank you Mr. President.  Looking ahead to your work with Congress
next year you mentioned as an area of possible compromise: tax-reform.  And so
I'm wondering do you see a Republican Congress as presenting a better
opportunity for actually getting tax reform next year.  Will you be putting out
a new proposal?  Are you willing to consider both individual and corporate sides
of the tax ledger there.  And also are you still worried about corporate
inversions?

OBAMA: I think an all-democratic Congress would have provided an even better
opportunity for tax reform, but I think talking to speaker Boehner and
leader McConnel that they're serious about wanting to get some things done.  The
tax area is one area where we can get things done.  And I think in the coming
weeks leading up the State of the Union there'll be some conversations at the
staff levels about what principles each side are looking at.  I can tell you
broadly what I'd like to see.  I'd like to see more simplicity in the system.
I'd like to see more fairness in the system.  WIth respect to the corporate tax
reform issue, we know that there are companies that are paying the full freight:
35%.  Higher than just about any other company on earth if you're paying 35%.
And then there are other companies that are paying 0 because they've got better
accountants or lawyers.  That's not fair.  There are companies that are parking
money outside the country because of tax avoidance.  We think that it's
important that everybody pay something if in fact they are effectively
headquartered in the United States.  In terms of corporate inversion those are
situations where companies really are headquartered here, but on paper switch
their headquarters to see if they can avoid paying their fair share of taxes.  I
think that needs to be fixed.  So fairness, everybody paying their fair share,
everybody taking responsibility.  I think is gonna be very important.  Some of
those principles, I've heard republicans say they share.  How we do that- you
know, the devil's in the details. And I'll be interested in seeing what they
want to move forward.  I'm gonna make sure that we put forward some pretty
specific proposals building on what we've already put forward.

OBAMA: One other element of this that I think is important is and I've been on
this hobby-horse now for 6 years [aside] bless you, we've got a lot of
infrastructure that we've gotta rebuild in this country if we're gonna be
competitive: Roads. Bridges. Ports. Airports.  Electrical grids.  Water systems.
Sewage systems.  We are way behind and early on we indicated that there is a way
of us potentially doing corporate tax reform, lowering rates, eliminating
loopholes so everybody's paying their fair share, and during that transition
also providing a mechanism where we can get some infrastructure built.  I'd like
to see us work on that issue as well.  Historically obviously, infrastructure
has not been a Democratic or Republican issue, and I'd like to see if we can
return to that tradition.  Julie Pace.

Reporter: Thank you Mr. President.  I want to ask about Cuba.  What would you
say to dissidents or democracy advocates inside Cuba who fear that the policy
changes you announced this week would give the Castro regime economic benefits
without having to address human rights or their politcal system.  When your
administration was lifting sanctions on Myanmar you saw committments of reform.
Why not do the same with Cuba?  And in fact to just follow up on North Korea do
you have any indication that North Korea was acting in conjunction with another
country, perhaps China?

OBAMA: We've got no indication that North Korea was acting in conjunction with another
country.  With respect to Cuba, we're glad that the Cuban government has
released slightly over 50 dissidents, that they're gonna be allowing the
international committee of the Red Cross and the United Nation's human rights
agencies to operate more freely inside of Cuba and monitor what is taking place.
I share the concerns of dissidents there.  And human rights advocates.  That
this is still a regime that represses its people.  And as I said when I made the
announcement, I don't anticipate overnight changes.  But what I know deep in my
bones is that if you've done the same thing for 50 years and nothing's changed,
you should try something different if you want a different outcome.  And this
gives us an opportunity for a different outcome.  Because suddenly Cuba is open
to the world in ways that is has not been before.  It's open to Americans
travelling there in ways that it hasn't been before.  It's open to Church groups
visiting their fellow believers inside of Cuba in ways they haven't been before.
It offers the prospect of telecommunications and the internet being more widely
available in Cuba in ways that it hasn't been before.  And over time that chips
away at this hermetically sealed society.  And I believe offers the best
prospect then of leading to greater freedom, greater self-determination, on the
part of the Cuban people.  I think it'll happen in fits and starts.  But through
engagement we have a better chance of bringing about change than we would have
otherwise.

Reporter:  Do you have a goal for where you see Cuba being at the end of your
presidency?

OBAMA: I think it'd be unrealistic for me to map out exactly where Cuba will be.
But change is gonna come to Cuba, it has to.  They've got an economy that
doesn't work.  They've been reliant for years: first on subsidies from the
Soviet Union, then on subsidies from Venezuala.  Those can't be sustained.  And
the more the Cuban people see what's possible, the more interested they're going
to be in change.  But how societies change is country specific, it is culturally
specific.  It could happen fast, it could happen slower than I'd like.  But it's
gonna happen.  I think this change in policy is gonna advance them.  Leslie
Clarke?

Reporter: Thank you Mr. President.  I actually had a number of questions on Cuba
as well.

OBAMA: Ok.  Do I have to write all these down?  How many are there? [laughs] "A number"
sounds intimidating.

Reporter: I'll be as quick as I can.  I wanted to see if you got any assurances
from the Cuban government that it would not revert to the same sort of sabotage
that it has in the past, when past presidents have made similar overtures to the
government.

OBAMA: Meaning?  Can you be specific?  What do you mean?

Reporter: When the Clinton administration made some overtures they shot down
planes.  They sort of have this pattern of doing provocative....

OBAMA: Ok, so just general provocative activies?

Reporter: I wanted to see what is your knowledge of whether Fidel Castro had any
role in the talks.  Did you talk [to him] when you talked to president Raul Castro?  Did
Fidel Castro's name come up?  Did you ask about him, how he's doing?  People
haven't seen him in awhile.  Given the deep opposition from some Republicans in
Congress to lifting the embargo, to opening the embassy, to any of the changes
that you're doing are you going to personally get involved in terms of talking
to them about efforts that they want to do to block money on a new embassy.

OBAMA: Alright Leslie I think I'm gonna cut you off here.  This is taking up a lot of
time.  So, with respect to sabotage- my understanding of the history for example
the plane being shot down.  It's not clear that that was the Cuban government
purposefully trying to undermine overtures by the Clinton administration.  It
was a tragic circumstance that ended up collapsing talks that had begun to take
place.  I haven't seen a  historical record that suggests they shot the plane
down specifically in order to undermine overtures by the Clinton government.  I
think the- it is not precedented for the President of the United States and the
president of Cuba to make an announcement at the same time that they are moving
towards normalizing relations.  So there hasn't been anything like this in the
past.  That doesn't mean that over the next two years we can't anticipate them
taking certain actions that we may end up finding deeply troubling.  Either
inside of Cuba, or with respect to their foreign policy.  And that could put
significant strains on the relationship.  But that's true of a lot of countries
out there where we have an embassy.  And the whole point of normalizing
relations is that it gives us a greater opportunity to have influence with that
government than not.

OBAMA: So I would be surprised if the Cuban government purposefully tries to
undermine what is now effectively its own policy.  I wouldn't be surprised if
they take at any given time actions that we think are a problem.  And we will be
in a position to respond to whatever actions they take the same way we do with a
whole range of countries around the world when they do things we think are wrong.
But the point is that  we will be in a better position I think to actually have
some influence and there may be carrots as well as sticks that we can then apply.

OBAMA: The only way that Fidel's name came up,  I think I may have mentioned
this in the David Muir article that I did, was I delivered a fairly lengthy
statement at the front end about how we're looking forward to a new future in
the relationship between our two countries but that we are gonna continue to
press on issues of democracy and humand rights which we think are important.  My
opening remarks probably took about 15 minutes, which on the phone is a pretty
long time.  And at the end of that he said, "Mr. President you're still a young
man, perhaps you have the opportunity"- at the end of my remarks I appologized
for taking such a long time but I wanted to make sure that before we engaged in
the conversation that we- that he was very clear about where I stood.  He said,
"Oh don't worry about it Mr. President, you're still a young man and you've
still got a chance to break Fidel's record, he once spoke 7 hours straight".
And then President Castro proceeded to deliver his own preliminary remarks that
lasted at least twice as long as mine.  Uh, and then I was able to say
"Obviously it runs in the family".  But that was the only discussion of Fidel
Castro that we had.  I sorta forgot all of the other questions.

Reporter: I had two more.  How personally involved are you going to get in-

OBAMA: With respect to Congress we cannot unilaterally bring down the embargo.  That's
codified in the Libertad Act, and what I do think is gonna happen though is
there's gonna be a process where Congress digests it there are bipartisan
supporters of our new approach.  There are bipartisan detractors of this new
approach.  People will see how the actions we take unfold.  And I think there's
gonna be a healthy debate inside of Congress.  And I will certainly weigh-in.  I
think that ultimately we need to go ahead and pull down the embargo which I
think has been self-defeating in advancing the aims that we're interested in.
But I don't anticipate that that happens right away.  I think people are gonna
want to see how does this move forward before there's any serious debate about
whether or not we would make major shifts in the embargo.  Alright.

Reporter: I wanted to follow on that by asking under what conditions would you
meet with President Castro in Havannah.  Would you have certain preconditions
that you would want to see met before doing that?  And on the hack, I know that
youd said that you're not gonna announce your response, but can you say whether
you're considering additional economic sanctions on North Korea.  Can you rule
out the use of Military force or some kind of cyber hit of your own.

OBAMA: I think I'm going to leave it where I left it, which is- we just confirmed
that it was North Korea.  we have been working out a range of options.  They
will be presented to me.  I will make a decision on those based on what I
believe is proportional and appropriate to the nature of this crime.

OBAMA: With respect to Cuba, we're not at a stage here where me visiting Cuba or
President Castro coming to the United States is in the cards.  I don't know how
this relationship will develop over the next several years.  I'm a fairly young
man so I imagine that at some point in my life I'll have the opportunity to
visit Cuba and enjoy interacting with the Cuba people, but there's nothing
specific where we're trying to target some sort of visit.  On my part.  Colleen
McCain-Nelson?

Reporter: Thank you Mr. President.  You spoke earlier about 2014 being a
breakthrough year and you ended the year with executive actions on Cuba and
immigration, and climate change, but you didn't make much progress this year on
your legislative agenda and some Republican lawmakers have said that they're
less-inclined to work with you if you pursue executive actions so aggressively.
Are you going to continue to pursue executive actions if that creates more
roadblocks for your legislative agenda, or have you conlcuded that it's not
possible to break the fever in Washington and the partisan gridlock here.

OBAMA: I think there are real opportunities to get things done in Congress. As I said
before, I take speaker Boehner and Mitch McConnell at their words that they want
to get things done.  I think the American people would like to see us get some
things get done.  The question's gonna be, are we able to separate out those
areas where we disagree and those areas where we agree.  I think there's gonna
be some tough fights on areas where we disagree.  If Republicans seek to take
healthcare away from people who just got it, they will meet stiff resistance
from me.  If they try to water down consumer protections that we put in place in
the aftermath of the financial crisis, I will say no. And I'm confident that
I'll be able to uphold vetos of those types of provisions.But on increasing
American's exports, on simplifying our tax system, on rebuilding our
infrastructure my hope is we can get some things done.  I've never been
persuaded by this argument that if it weren't for the executive actions they
would have been more productive.  There's no evidence of that.  So I intend to
continue to do what I've been doing which is where I see a big problem and the
opportunity to help the American people, and it is within my lawful authority to
provide that help, I'm gonna do it.

OBAMA: And I will side-by-side reach out to members of Congress, reach out to
Republicans, and say: "Let's work together, I'd rather do it with you".
Immigration's the classic example.  I was really happy when the Senate passed a
bipartisan comprehensive immigration bill.  And I did everything I could for a
year and a half to provide Republicans the space to act.  And showed not only
great patience but flexibility.  Saying to them, "Look if there are specific
changes you'd like to see, we're willing to compromise, we're willing to be
patient, we're willing to work with you".  Ultimately it wasn't forthcoming.
And so the question is going to be, I think: if executive actions on areas like
mimimum wage or equal pay or having a more sensible immigration system are
important to Republicans.  If they care about those issues, and the executive
actions are bothering them.  Then there is a very simple solution: that is pass
bills.  And work with me to make sure I'm willing to sign those bills.  Because
both sides are going to have to compromise.  On most issues in order for their
initiatives to become law, I'm going to have to sign off.  And that means
they're going to have to take into account the issues that I care about.  Just
as I'm going to take into account the issues that they care about.  Alright, I
think this is going to be our last question.  Juliet Auspren?

Reporter: So one of the first bills that Mitch McConnel said he would send to
you is one that would send to you is one that would authorize construction of
the Keystone-Excel pipeline.  When you talked baout this in the past you
minimized the benefits and highlighted some of the risks associated with that
project.  I wondered if you could tell us both what you would do when faced with
that bill given the Republican majority we'll have in both chambers.  And would
you see as the benefits and given the precipitous drop we've seen in oil prices
recently does that change the calculus in terms of how it would contribute to
climate change.  And whether you think it makes sense to go ahead with that
project.

OBAMA: I don't think I've minimized the benefits.  I think I've described the
benefits.  At issue in Keystone is not American oil.  It is Canadian oil.  That
is drawn out of tar sands in Canada.  That oil currently is being shipped out
through rail or trucks and it would save Canadian oil companies and the Canadian
oil industry an enormous ammount of money if they could simply pipe it all the
way through the United States down to the Gulf.  Once that oil gets to the gulf,
it is then entering into the world market.  And it would be sold all around the
world.  So there's no.  I won't say "no".  There is very little impact nominal
impact on U.S. gas prices.  What the average American consumer cares about, by
having this pipeline come through.  And something the way this gets sold as is
"Lets get this oil, and it's gonna come here".  And the implication is that this
oil will lower gas prices here in the U.S.  It's not!  There's a global oil
market.  It's very good for Canadian oil companies, and it's good for the
Canadian oil industry, but it's not gonna be a huge benefit to U.S. consumers.
It's not even gonna be a nominal benefit to U.S. consumers.  Now, the
construction the pipeline itself will create: probably a couple thousand jobs.
Those are temporary jobs until the construction actually happens.  There's
probably some additional jobs that can be created in the refining process down
in the gulf.  Those aren't completely insignificant, you know it's just like any
other project.  But when you consider what we could be doing if we were
rebuilding our roads and bridges around the country.  Something that congress
could authorize, we could probably create hundreds of thousands of jobs.  Or a
million jobs.  So if that is the argument there are a lot of more direct ways to
create well paying American construction jobs.  And then with respect to the
cost all I've said is that I want to make sure that if in fact this project goes
forward, that it's not adding to the problem of climate change, which I think is
very serious, and does impose serious costs on the American people.  Some of
them long-term, but significant costs nonetheless.  if we've got more flooding,
more wildifres, more drought.  There are direct economic impacts on that, and as
we're now rebuilding after Sandy for example, we're having to consider how to we
increase preparedness in how we structure infrastructure and housing and soforth
along the Jersey Shore.  That's an example of the kind of costs that are imposed
and you can put a dollar figure on it.

OBAMA: So, in terms of process you've got a Nebraska judge that's still
determining whether or not the new path for this pipeline is appropriate.  Once
that is resolved then the state department will have all the information it
needs to make its decision.  But I've just tried to give this perspective
because I think that there's been this tendency to really hype this thing as
some magic formula and to what ails the US economy and its hard to see on paper
where exactly they're getting that information from.  In terms of oil prices and
how it impacts the decision I think that it won't have a significant impact
except perhaps in the minds of folks when gas prices are lower maybe there'll be
more or less susceptible to the argument that this is the answer to lowering gas
prices.  But it was never gonna be the answer to lowering gas prices because the
oil that would be piped through the Keystone Pipeline would go into the world
market and that's what determines all prices ultimately.

Reporter: In terms of Congress forcing your hand on this is this something where
you'll clearly say you're not going to let Congress force your hand on whether
to approve or disapprove this program?

OBAMA: I'll see what they do.  We'll take that up in the New Year.  I'll take one more
question; April, go ahead.

Reporter: Thank you Mr. President.  Last question.  Six years ago this month I
asked you what was the state of black America in the oval office and you said it
was the best of times and the worst of times.  You said it was the best of times
in the sense that there has never been more opportunity for African Americans
who have received a good education, and the worst of times for unemployment and
the lack of opportunity.  With ending 2014, what is the state of black Americans
as we talk about those issues as well as race relations in this Country?

OBAMA: Like the rest of America, black America in the aggregate is better off now than
it was when I came into office.  The jobs that have been created, the people who
have gotten health insurance, the housing equity that has been recovered, the
401 pensions that have been recovered.  A lot of those folks are African
American.  They're better off than they were.  The gap between income and wealth
of white and black America persists and we've got more work to do on that front.
I've been consistent in saying that this is a legacy of a troubled racial past.
Jim Crowe and slavery.  That's not an excuse for black folks.  And I think the
overwhelming majority of black people understand it's not an excuse, they're
working hard, they're out there hustling, trying to get an education trying to
send their kids to college but they're starting behind often times in the race,
and what's true for all mericans is we should be willing to provide people a
hand up not a hand out.  Help folks get that good early childhood education.
Help them graduate from high school.  Help them afford college.  If they do then
they're gonna be able to succeed and that's gonna be good for all of us.

OBAMA: And we've seen some progress, the education reform that we've initiated
are showing measurable results.  We have the highest high school graduation that
we've seen in a very long time.  We have are seeing record numbers of young
people atteding college.  Many states that have initiated reforms you're seeing
progress in math scores and reading scores for African American and Latino
students as well as the broader population but we've still got more work to go.

OBAMA: Now obviously how we're thinking about race relations right now has been
colored by Ferguson, the Garner case in New York, a growing awareness in the
broader population of what many communities of color have understood for some
time.  And that is that there are specific instances at least where law
enforcement doesn't feel as if it is being applied in a color-blind fashion.
The task force that I formed is supposed to report back to me in 90 days.  Not
with a bunch of abstract musings about race relations but some really concrete
practical things that police departments and law enforcement agencies can begin
implementing right now to rebuild trust between communities of color and the
police department.  And my intention is to as soon as I get those
recommendations to start implementing. Some of them we'll be able to do through
executive action, some of them will require congressional action, some of them
will require action on the part of states and local jurisdictions.

OBAMA: But I actually think it's been a healthy conversation that we've had.
These are not new phenomenon, the fact that they're now surfacing- in part
because people are able to film what have just been in the past have been
stories passed around a kitchen table allows people to make their own
assessments and evaluations.  You're not gonna solve a problem if it's not being
talked about.  In the meantime we've been moving forward on criminal justice
reform issues more broadly.  One of the things I didn't talk about in my opening
statement was the fact that last year was the first time in forty earrs where we
had the federal prison population go down and the crime rate go down at the same
time.  Which indicates the degree to which it's possible for us to think smarter
about who we're incarcerating, how long we're incarcerating, how are we dealing
with non-violent offenders, how are we dealing with drug offenses, diversion
programs, drug courts.  We can do a better job of, and save money in the process
by, initiating some of these reforms and I've been really pleased to see that
we've had Republicans and democrats in Congress who are interested in these
issues as well.

OBAMA: The one thing that I will say, and this is going to be the last thing I
say, is that I - one of the great thing about this job is that you get to know
the American people.  I mean, you meet folks from every walk of life and every
region of the country, every race, every faith, and what I don't think is always
captured in our political debates is the vast majority of people are just trying
to do the right thing.  And people are basically good, and have good intentions.
Sometimes our institutions and our systems don't work as well as they should.
Sometimes you know, you've got a police department that has gotten into bad
habits over a period of time and hasn't maybe surfaced some hidden biases that
we all carry around.  But if you offer practical solutions, people want to fix
these problems.  It's not a situation where people feel good seeing somebody
choked and die.  I think that troubles everybody.  So there's an opportunity of
all of us to come together and take a practical approach to these problems.  And
I guess that's my general theme for the end of the year.  Which is, we've gone
through difficult times.  It is your job press-core, to report on all the
mistakes that are made, all the bad things that happen, all the crises that look
like they're popping, and I understand that.  But, through persistent effort,
and faith in the American people, things get better.  The economy's gotten
better.  Our ability to generate clean energy has gotten better.  We know more
about how to educate our kids.  We solved problems.  Ebola is a real crisis.
You get a mistake in the first case because it's not something that's been seen
before; we fix it.  You have some unaccompanied children who spike at a border
and it may not get fixed in the timeframe of the news cycle, but it gets fixed.
And you know, part of what I hope as we've reflected on the new year is that
this should generate some confidence.  America knows how to solve problems.  And
when we work together, we can't be stopped.  And now I'm gonna go on vacation.

OBAMA: Mele Kalikimaka everybody!  Mahalo!  Thank you everybody.
